Cool. Thank you, Winston. And, yeah. Thanks, everyone, for being here. I'm excited to show
you another project that Joe and I have been working on this year, Shinymeta. And I want
to start off sort of by first sharing that it's pretty crazy for me to be up here doing
this talk and standing in front of you as a RStudio software engineer, because it seems
like not that long ago, I was a grad student struggling with learning R and really, you
know, not having a ton of fun with it and certainly didn't expect to become a software
engineer at any point within the next, say, ten years. And in my second year of grad school,
I discovered like ggplot2 and things that became the Tidyverse. And right around that
same time, you know, I was becoming more productive with my R programming. And I then
discovered this thing called Shiny, and it just kind of blew me away, like how magical
it was to, like, take my analysis and, with very minimal changes, turn it into an interactive
web app. So that was really the point where I sort of became sort of, like, really into
R and really into programming. And I was just sort of blown away at how I could enable
others to sort of tease apart the data that I was working with and also found it really
useful for teaching when I was a grad student as well. So this interactive power that Shiny
brings to the table is really, really great. But we should acknowledge that whenever we
make the decision to use an interactive tool for our work as data scientists, as statisticians,
that decision to use an interactive tool over reproducible code is going to come at the
cost of reproducibility. So if we focus in on Shiny, really the core problem here is
that in order to do its thing, Shiny sort of depends on the user events to sort of drive
the application logic. And this Shiny runtime execution that sort of determines, like, what
R code to execute in response to, you know, what user events. And at least for a number
of years, we've been able to mostly work around this problem in focus of user events through
Shiny bookmarking. So this at least allows us to save the state of the application at
any point in time and in theory be able to come back to the state of the application
sort of assuming that, you know, the app is there available and allowing us to sort of
restore the state of the application. But especially if we're not, like, if we don't
have control over the application, if somebody else is hosting that for us, our bookmarking
URL that we go to to go back to the state of our application, if that app is no longer
available, we're kind of out of luck. So in that sense, we still lack some sense of permanence
that we get from reproducible R code. And even if the app is working and we can sort
of replicate the user events and get back to the state of the application, we still
sort of lack some sense of transparency in the sense that those outputs are still locked
behind a graphical user interface. And if, even if I could get at the source code behind
the application, sort of the core R domain logic that I might be interested in verifying
is correct, that's still sort of intertwined with Shiny's runtime engine and it's sort
of hard to know exactly, like, what R code is being executed at any point in time. So
the goal here is we sort of want to enable you to eliminate that Shiny runtime dependency
in some sense, where we want to enable you to write Shiny apps that can generate R code
to essentially mimic the code that it's executing so that you can run that code without Shiny
and without having to, like, duplicate that logic yourself in multiple places.
So the project that we're working on to help you enable this feature is the Shiny
meta R package. And this provides tools for you as the Shiny app developer to capture
the core essential domain logic that is powering your application and exposing it as code to
users that they can run outside of the Shiny app.
So to demonstrate how Shiny meta works, we're going to work through this real basic Shiny
app example. It just has a text input box where I can type in a R package name. And
as I type in different packages, I can get a new time series of the number of downloads
for the past year for that given R package.
So the goal is to modify this Shiny application and add an ability for this code to update
every time I enter a new package and give me reproducible R code back that I can copy
and paste into a new fresh R session and essentially mimic the execution of this Shiny application.
So here is the entire implementation of that basic Shiny app. As with any Shiny app, there's
two main components. The UI object at the top is for the user interface. It just has
the text input for where I put the package name. And then the plot output sort of container
for the time series plot.
And then the server logic below that is going to determine how to take that input from the
text input box and create the ggplot time series for the plot output.
So we're going to zoom in on the server functionality. And the first step with adding Shiny meta
integration is determine where in the logic of my Shiny app is the core domain logic that
I want to provide to my user.
And we're going to walk through these three different steps here. So let's focus in on
step one. This downloads reactive. Essentially, it's taking the current value of this text
input, and it's referencing that as input dollar package, feeding that into this CRAN
downloads function to give me the previous, like the downloads for the last year for this
package.
And then in the downloads rolling reactive, we take the return value of the downloads
reactive. And if it's a sensible value, we will use dplyr and this zoo package to compute
a weekly rolling average, mainly just for visualization purposes.
And notice that I haven't highlighted this particular part of the reactive expression.
This part is mainly just here to improve the interactive experience of the Shiny app and
doesn't really have any sort of, you know, domain context in terms of actually producing
the plot output. This is assuming we have a valid R package name is not really necessary
to be here.
So we'll talk a little bit about that in the next step. But in the last step here, we'll
just take the return value of the downloads rolling and feed that into ggplot.
So domain logic here identified in blue.
Then the next step is to use Shiny meta's meta reactive building blocks and capture
that domain logic that we've highlighted in blue. And those Shiny meta reactive building
blocks are highlighted in pink.
So the downloads reactive has just changed from reactive to meta reactive. So meta reactive
will assume that the entire expression is domain logic that you want to export to the
user.
But in this case of the downloads rolling, where we have just part of the reactive expression
that we want to capture as domain logic, we use meta reactive 2 instead, and then we can
just target a particular part of that reactive expression with this meta expert function
and just tag that as the domain logic that we want to export.
And then finally, for rendering functions, since these are a little bit different in
the sense that anybody can implement their own rendering function, we meta renders kind
of like a decorator function where it takes the rendering function as the first argument.
Here it's rendered plot.
And then the second argument is the reactive expression.
Right. So now we've in some sense captured the domain logic with these meta reactive
equivalents to Shiny reactive building blocks.
And the next part is to, within sort of the domain logic, identify any reactive reads.
So at the very top here, I'm reading the current value of the text input.
And then down below, I'm reading the return value of the downloads reactive expression
and reading the return value of the downloads rolling reactive.
So this part is probably going to be the hardest part to see, but once we've identified the
reactive reads in blue, then we're going to mark those reactive reads with a dot operator.
And this is going to essentially provide a signal to the Shiny meta code generation mode
and let it know that when we go to generate code from these reactive components, I want
to essentially let Shiny meta know that these should be replaced with either a static value
that it represents or a variable name that will represent the value that it really represents.
So we'll see that in a second.
I also want to point out that this dot dot operator, you can think of it in some sense
as the, like the bang bang from Rlang, in the sense that you can use it like a unquoting
operator where if you wrap any sort of R code that's not reactive, it will just evaluate
that code instead of returning the expression.
So we'll see how this can be used to essentially like hard code a dynamic value.
And then really the last step to actually generating the code to mimic the code that
the Shiny app is actually executing when it goes to like fill in the outputs of the
Shiny app is to use this expand chain function.
And here I'm just providing it the plot outputs object.
But if you had multiple objects, you could provide multiple outputs to this function.
And not only will it return the domain logic in a way that can run outside of the Shiny
app, but it will also figure out sort of the minimal amount of code necessary to do so.
So when we actually call expand chain, it will return all of the logic that we've captured
with the metareactive building blocks.
And before returning, it's going to walk through this code and it's going to look for these
dot dot operators.
And it's going to find this first dot dot operator and it's going to kind of recognize
that it's a marked input value.
And in this case, since this is just, well, what it will do is return it with the current
value that's in the text input box when we go and actually call this expand chain function.
All right.
And then this part, there's nothing really special in a reactive sense about this R code
inside this dot dot operator.
But I'm essentially just putting the date as it stands today, the day that I'm generating
this code in a human readable format.
So this dot dot operator can in some sense be used to not only like hard code a dynamic
value, but also if you kind of master metaprogramming in some sense, if you're familiar with bang
bang from Rlang, you can use it in ways to make your code that you're generating a little
more human readable.
All right.
So now it's going to go to the next dot dot operator and it's going to recognize, oh,
this downloads reactive read.
This actually represents a value that now actually exists in this code that I'm generating.
Because it's going to recognize that, you know, the downloads reactive that we now have
static code for, this is a variable that now exists.
So I can just simply replace this reactive read with the variable name.
And then it will do the same thing for the downloads rolling.
Now that we're essentially creating a new variable, downloads rolling, I can reuse that
in the ggplot visualization call.
All right.
So for most serious applications, your reactive code is going to rely on some setup code,
sort of like some subset maybe of the setup code that, you know, you have above your launching
of the Shiny app to do things like loading libraries and reading in data, these sort
of things.
And at least one way that you can approach this today is you can quote that subset of
code and provide it to expand chain and it will just return it verbatim.
And that's all we really need to get this application spitting out our code that I can
then copy and paste in a fresh R session to mimic the code that the reactives are actually
executing.
But I don't actually recommend just inlining code like this in your Shiny app.
We should really think about providing a better user experience.
There's a couple ways to do this with Shiny Meta, but I'm going to show you the more powerful
approach, which is to have something like a download button and have this button call
this build RMD bundle from Shiny Meta, which allows you to provide a zip bundle to your
user with both like an RMD source file with the code that's influenced by the user input
as well as the rendered output of that R markdown source.
So if we start with our expand chain that's generating the code to mimic the code that
we need for the time series visualization, we can slip that inside a download handler
and take the results of that expand chain call and feed it into this build RMD bundle.
But this build RMD bundle will also need an R markdown template and here is where you
can specify where in your R markdown template you actually want to place the code.
And this can be pretty useful when you have, say, lots of different outputs in your Shiny
app.
You can place them in different R markdown chunks and also like specify the output format
and customize to your heart's content.
So just to give you like a sense of what you can do with this sort of thing, here is basically
the same data but a better interface where I can go in and select different R packages
and compare them in the same visualization.
I can choose different transformations to the data and then finally click a download
report to get that RMD source and the output or like the rendered output of that RMD source.
So and now that we've sort of enabled our user to interact with the Shiny app, find
something that they're interested in and get a permanent artifact generated by the Shiny
app, in some sense what we can do is have like fully programmable dynamic reports without
any programming necessary.
So here what I've done, this is especially interesting if you work with dynamically updating
data, I can go into my Shiny app, like find the packages that I'm interested in and then
I can use something like RStudio Connect to schedule this thing to run, say, every day
or every month or every year and then I have like a historical permanent artifact.
Give you another sense of what's possible here, here is a Shiny app where I can upload
some data and run an ANOVA analysis on that data.
So I've uploaded a data set choosing like a response and some predictor variables, checking
that the assumptions of my ANOVA analysis are okay, that I can actually run this analysis,
choose some different predictor variables, actually run the model, get my results of
the test statistics, and then finally at the end of the day, download a report with
both the source and the output that I see in the application, that's all driven by the
data that I've uploaded and the inputs that I've chosen in the Shiny app.
All right, so in summary, interactivity is great, but whenever we do this, we're kind
of, sort of, it comes at the cost of reproducibility, but with Shiny Meta, you can, with some effort,
at least allow your users to get some reproducible code back out of that interactive application.
And to add integration to your Shiny app, you want to identify and capture the domain
logic, use this dot dot operator to mark reactive reads, and then expand chain to get the code
back out of the outputs that you're interested in, in the Shiny app, and then optionally,
to distribute that code to users, you can provide it as a zip bundle with the RMD source
and results via this build RMD bundle, so thanks.
We just have time for a couple quick questions.
How does the use of Shiny Meta affect performance, since it seems to be doing a lot of extra
evaluation?
So it really shouldn't affect the performance at all, really, in the sense that there's
two modes of execution in Shiny Meta, so when you call expand chain, it sort of opts into
this meta execution mode, and that's, when that happens, it's doing some computation
to generate code, but it's actually, you know, not necessarily evaluating expensive code,
and that evaluation is actually totally separate from the normal execution mode that is normally,
the normal execution is what allows, like, the output of the time series to actually
be generated in the Shiny app, that's a totally separate execution model from the generation
of the code.
Okay, I think that's all we have time for questions.
Thanks a lot, Carson.
Thank you, everybody, for coming, and have a great break.